Scheduled services with Google Sheets/Drive guide (#528)
nitrictech/docs: src/pages/guides/getting-started/python/scheduled-report.mdx

Reviewer: Needs a title

Author: Added!

In this tutorial, we'll learn how to integrate Nitric with some popular Google service apis.
We'll create a scheduled service which will run on a daily basis to create and share a Google Sheets document with another user.

## Prerequisites

- The [Nitric CLI](/guides/getting-started/installation)
- [Pipenv](https://pypi.org/project/pipenv/) - for simplified dependency management
- A [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com) account with Sheets and Drive APIs enabled.
- Credentials for a Google service account.

## Project setup

First, we'll create a new nitric project and install the necessary Python packages.

```bash
nitric new reports py-starter
pipenv install google-auth google-api-python-client
pipenv install --dev
```

You can now delete all files in the `services/` folder, we'll create new services in this guide.

## Authenticate with Google Cloud APIs

Start by creating a new folder inside 'service' named 'helpers' and creating a blank `__init__.py` to identify it as a python package.

We'll begin coding in a new file `services\helpers\google.py`, creating a function that can authenticate with Google's API and ensure our application has the necessary permissions.

> ```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services/helpers/google.py' }}
```

import google.auth
from googleapiclient.discovery import build
import os

SCOPES = ['https://www.googleapis.com/auth/spreadsheets', 'https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive']

def service_login():
    creds = None
    credentials_path = os.getenv('GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS')

    if credentials_path:
        creds, _ = google.auth.load_credentials_from_file(credentials_path, SCOPES)
    else:
        raise ValueError("GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS is not set, failed to load credentials")

    return build('sheets', 'v4', credentials=creds), build('drive', 'v3', credentials=creds)
```

## Create, populate and share a spreadsheet

### Create a new sheet

> ```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services/helpers/google.py' }}
```

def create_spreadsheet(title, sheets_service):
    body = {'properties': {'title': title}}
    spreadsheet = sheets_service.spreadsheets().create(body=body, fields='spreadsheetId').execute()
    return spreadsheet.get('spreadsheetId')
```

### Generate sample data for the report

> ```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services/helpers/google.py' }}
```

import random
import datetime

def generate_dummy_data(rows=10):
    data = [['Name', 'Date', 'Value']]
    names = ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Charlie', 'Diana', 'Evan']

    for _ in range(rows):
        name = random.choice(names)
        date = (datetime.date.today() - datetime.timedelta(days=random.randint(0, 365))).isoformat()
        value = random.randint(100, 1000)
        data.append([name, date, value])

    return data
```

### Insert the generated data into the spreadsheet

> ```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services/helpers/google.py' }}
```

def insert_data_into_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, data, sheets_service):
    range_name = 'A1'
    body = {'values': data}
    result = sheets_service.spreadsheets().values().update(
        spreadsheetId=spreadsheet_id, range=range_name,
        valueInputOption='RAW', body=body).execute()
    print(f"{result.get('updatedCells')} cells updated.")
```

### Share the generated spreadsheet with another account

> ```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services/helpers/google.py' }}
```

def share_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, email_address, drive_service):
    drive_service.permissions().create(
        fileId=spreadsheet_id,
        body={'type': 'user', 'role': 'writer', 'emailAddress': email_address},
        fields='id'
    ).execute()
```

## Daily report schedule

Next we'll pull it all together in our scheduled service, which will run daily and send an invitation to the specified user.

Create a file named `report.py` in the `services` directory, where you'll implement your scheduled task service.

> Note: Nitric allows you to set schedules using simple expressions e.g. `7 days`, you can also use [cron expressions](/schedules#using-cron) for more complicated requirements.

> ```python {{ tag: 'services\report.py' }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services/report.py' }}
```

export const description =
  'Use the Nitric framework in python to generate and share a daily report using Google Sheets and Google Drive.'

# Generate a report with Google Sheets and share it with Google Drive

## What we'll be doing

In this tutorial, we'll learn how to integrate Nitric with some popular Google service apis.
We'll create a scheduled service which will run on a daily basis to create and share a Google Sheets document with another user.

## Prerequisites

- The [Nitric CLI](/guides/getting-started/installation)
- [Pipenv](https://pypi.org/project/pipenv/) - for simplified dependency management
- A [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com) account with Sheets and Drive APIs enabled.
- Credentials for a Google service account.

> ## Project Setup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Project setup
```

> Create a project directory, initialize a Nitric project, and install necessary Python packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we'll create a new nitric project and install the necessary Python packages.
```

```bash
nitric new reports py-starter
pipenv install google-auth google-api-python-client
pipenv install --dev
```

You can now delete all files in the `services/` folder, we'll create new services in this guide.

## Authenticate with Google Cloud APIs

> Start by creating a new folder 'helpers' and creating a blank '\_\_init\_\_.py' to identify it as a python package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start by creating a new folder inside 'service' named 'helpers' and creating a blank `__init__.py` to identify it as a python package.
```

> We'll begin coding in a new file `services\helpers\google.py`,
> Here we will authenticate against Google's API and ensure that our application has the necessary permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll begin coding in a new file `services\helpers\google.py`, creating a function that can authenticate with Google's API and ensure our application has the necessary permissions.
```

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python  {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}
```

import google.auth
from googleapiclient.discovery import build
import os

SCOPES = ['https://www.googleapis.com/auth/spreadsheets', 'https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive']

def service_login():
    creds = None
    credentials_path = os.getenv('GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS')

    if credentials_path:
        creds, _ = google.auth.load_credentials_from_file(credentials_path, SCOPES)
    else:

>         raise Exception("Missing/Invalid credentials.")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        raise ValueError("GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS is not set, failed to load credentials")
```

    return build('sheets', 'v4', credentials=creds), build('drive', 'v3', credentials=creds)
```

> ## Create, Populate and Share Google Sheet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Create, populate and share a speadsheet
```

### Create a new sheet

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python  {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}
```

def create_spreadsheet(title, sheets_service):

>     spreadsheet = {'properties': {'title': title}}
>     spreadsheet = sheets_service.spreadsheets().create(body=spreadsheet, fields='spreadsheetId').execute()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    body = {'properties': {'title': title}}
    spreadsheet = sheets_service.spreadsheets().create(body=body, fields='spreadsheetId').execute()
```

    return spreadsheet.get('spreadsheetId')
```

### Generate sample data for the report

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}
```

import random
import datetime

def generate_dummy_data(rows=10):
    data = [['Name', 'Date', 'Value']]
    names = ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Charlie', 'Diana', 'Evan']

    for _ in range(rows):
        name = random.choice(names)
        date = (datetime.date.today() - datetime.timedelta(days=random.randint(0, 365))).isoformat()
        value = random.randint(100, 1000)
        data.append([name, date, value])

    return data
```

### Insert the generated data into the spreadsheet

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}
```

def insert_data_into_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, data, sheets_service):
    range_name = 'A1'
    body = {'values': data}
    result = sheets_service.spreadsheets().values().update(
        spreadsheetId=spreadsheet_id, range=range_name,
        valueInputOption='RAW', body=body).execute()
    print(f"{result.get('updatedCells')} cells updated.")
```

### Share the generated spreadsheet with another account

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services\helpers\google.py' }}
```

def share_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, email_address, drive_service):
    drive_service.permissions().create(
        fileId=spreadsheet_id,
        body={'type': 'user', 'role': 'writer', 'emailAddress': email_address},
        fields='id'
    ).execute()
```

> ## Daily Report Schedule

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Daily report schedule
```

Next we'll pull it all together in our scheduled service, which will run daily and send an invitation to the specified user.

> Create a file named `report.py`, where you'll implement your scheduled task service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a file named `report.py` in the `services` directory, where you'll implement your scheduled task service.
```

> Note: Nitric allows you to set schedules using simple expressions e.g. `7 days`, you can also use [cron expressions](/schedules#using-cron) for more complicated requirements.

> ```python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python {{ tag: 'services\report.py' }}
```

import os
from nitric.resources import schedule
from nitric.application import Nitric
from helpers import create_spreadsheet, generate_dummy_data, insert_data_into_spreadsheet, service_login, share_spreadsheet

report_schedule = schedule('run-a-report')

@report_schedule.every('1 days')

> async def process_transactions(ctx):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
async def daily_report(ctx):
```

    sheets_service, drive_service = service_login()
    spreadsheet_id = create_spreadsheet("Daily Report", sheets_service)
    dummy_data = generate_dummy_data(rows=20)
    insert_data_into_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, dummy_data, sheets_service)
    share_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, os.getenv('ADMIN_EMAIL'), drive_service)

Nitric.run()
```

## Creating your credentials file in the Google Cloud Console

1. Login into Google Cloud and create a new project.
2. Ensure the Google Sheets and Drive APIs are enabled for your project.
3. Navigate to "IAM & Admin" > "Service Accounts".
   Click "Create Service Account", enter the account details, and confirm by clicking "Create".
4. Inside the service account details, go to the "Keys" section.
   Select "Add Key" > "Create new key", choose "JSON", and click "Create" to download the credentials file.

## Environment Variables

> We can now update our environment variables, create a file named `.env` and set the following values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can now set environment variables with the values needed for the scheduled reporting to run. Create a file named `.env` in the root of your project and set the variables below, substituting the correct values for your setup.
```

```bash
GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=/path/to/your/service-account-file.json
ADMIN_EMAIL=admin@example.com
```

## Ok, let's run this thing!

Use the Nitric Dashboard to trigger the task immediately, rather than waiting for the scheduled frequency.

> Start the Nitric server to emulate cloud services:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start your project and the Nitric server to emulate cloud services:
```

```bash
nitric start
```

![trigger scheduled service](/docs/images/guides/scheduled-report/trigger.png)

## Deploy to the cloud

> Without creating a separate IaC project, we can immediately deploy our application to the cloud. To do this start by setting up our credentials and any configuration for the cloud you prefer:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Without creating a separate IaC project, we can immediately deploy our application to the cloud. To do this start by setting up credentials and any configuration for the cloud you prefer:
```

- [AWS](/reference/providers/aws)
- [Azure](/reference/providers/azure)
- [GCP](/reference/providers/gcp)

To do this, we'll need to create a `stack`. A stack represents a deployed instance of an application, which is a collection of resources defined in the project.

```bash
nitric stack new
```

> 
> > Note: You are responsible for staying within the limits of the free tier or any costs associated with deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

        fields='id'
    ).execute()
```

## Daily Report Schedule

Next we'll pull it all together in our scheduled service, which will run daily and send an invitation to the specified user.

Create a file named `report.py`, where you'll implement your scheduled task service.

> Note: Nitric allows you to set schedules using simple expressions e.g. `7 days`, you can also use [cron expressions](/schedules#using-cron) for more complicated requirements.

```python
import os
from nitric.resources import schedule
from nitric.application import Nitric
from helpers import create_spreadsheet, generate_dummy_data, insert_data_into_spreadsheet, service_login, share_spreadsheet

report_schedule = schedule('run-a-report')

@report_schedule.every('1 days')
async def process_transactions(ctx):
    sheets_service, drive_service = service_login()
    spreadsheet_id = create_spreadsheet("Daily Report", sheets_service)
    dummy_data = generate_dummy_data(rows=20)
    insert_data_into_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, dummy_data, sheets_service)
    share_spreadsheet(spreadsheet_id, os.getenv('ADMIN_EMAIL'), drive_service)

Nitric.run()
```

## Creating your credentials file in the Google Cloud Console

> 1. Login in to Google Cloud creating a new project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Login into Google Cloud and create a new project.
```

Select "Add Key" > "Create new key", choose "JSON", and click "Create" to download the credentials file.

## ENV Variables

We can now update our environment variables, create a file named `.env` and set the following values.

```bash
GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=/path/to/your/service-account-file.json
ADMIN_EMAIL=admin@example.com
```

## Ok, let's run this thing!

Use the Nitric Dashboard to trigger the task immediately, rather than waiting for the scheduled frequency.

Start the Nitric server to emulate cloud services:

```bash
nitric start
```

![trigger scheduled service](/docs/images/guides/scheduled-report/trigger.png)

## Deploy to the cloud

Without creating a separate IaC project, we can immediately deploy our application to the cloud. To do this start by setting up our credentials and any configuration for the cloud you prefer:

- [AWS](/reference/providers/aws)
- [Azure](/reference/providers/azure)
- [GCP](/reference/providers/gcp)

To do this, we'll need to create a `stack`. A stack represents a deployed instance of an application, which is a collection of resources defined in the project. 

```bash
nitric stack new
```

> ```
> ? What should we name this stack? dev
> ? Which provider do you want to deploy with? gcp
> ? Which region should the stack deploy to? us-east-1
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

export const description =
  'Use the Nitric framework in python to generate and share a nightly report using Google Sheets and Google Drive.'

## What we'll be doing

In this tutorial, we'll learn how to integrate Nitric with some popular Google service apis.

> We'll create a scheduled services which will run on a daily basis to create and share a Google Sheets document with another user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We'll create a scheduled service which will run on a daily basis to create and share a Google Sheets document with another user.
```

## Prerequisites

- The [Nitric CLI](/guides/getting-started/installation)
- [Pipenv](https://pypi.org/project/pipenv/) - for simplified dependency management
- A [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com) account with Sheets and Drive APIs enabled.
- Credentials for a Google service account.

## Project Setup

Create a project directory, initialize a Nitric project, and install necessary Python packages.

```bash
nitric new reports py-starter
pipenv install google-auth google-api-python-client
pipenv install --dev
```

You can now delete all files in the `services/` folder, we'll create new services in this guide.

## Authenticate with Google Cloud APIs

Start by creating a new folder 'helpers' and creating a blank '__init__.py' to identify it as a python package.

> We'll begin coding by in a new file 'services\helpers\google.py',

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We'll begin coding in a new file `services\helpers\google.py`,
```
